today's talk is really about masculinity
but more importantly it's also like
digging into
how we form our views of masculinity
and where our opinions come from and a
lot of the opinions that we have and
feelings we have around gender roles
are actually deeply rooted in personal
experiences that have shaped the way
that we think
and so i want people to understand that
like if you really want to
start to feel more comfortable with
gender related
issues whether they be societal or the
ones that you sit with
exploring your own personal story is a
wonderful way to kind of get a handle on
how you see the world
yeah so how you been man i've been
pretty good
i um i've
i've been actually pretty good i uh for
the most part have just been
focused on working this pandemic
obviously being isolated has its own
set of issues but overall mental health
and physical health have been pretty
great so
can't complain and remind me last time
we talked a little bit about
um was it your dad and and grief and
stuff
yeah yeah so we talked about uh loved
ones dying how to process and handle
that
and uh how best to to manage the
um loss of somebody close to you
and was that did that help at all or
i mean you know i sort of feel like i'm
fishing for a yes there but i'm just
genuinely curious like
yeah yeah well i mean i think any
opportunity to discuss something that
you normally don't discuss is always a
good thing
uh it's always strange to discuss
something that's very like
intimate difficult on a very public
platform
because everyone wants to chime in with
their opinions which is a bit of a
strange thing for something you feel so
personal uh but beyond that in terms of
like how i feel on the inside
much better yeah when you say everyone
wants to chime in with their feelings
who are you talking about
uh you know i i honestly like i i feel
this way every time i i
generally dislike being uh in a
vulnerable state on the internet it uh
sure understands it's not it's not uh
it's not generally my thing
um so as a result i think when people
give me their feedback or they stop me
it's kind of weird to have a stranger
being like man that moment about you and
your dad really touched me i'm just like
but i don't know you you know it's kind
of a weird feeling to
have somebody because it feels like
someone saw me naked and i don't know
who they are
you know
you know but you're the one doing the
touching apparently yes
yes yes but it's just it feels very
voyeuristic in a way not
it's consensual but it's still strange
because yeah i feel
it's that parasocial relationship that
people talk about a lot
where people feel like they know you and
they come up to you and they say all
these like
things about themselves i have no idea
who you are but you know this intimate
part of my life so
that's a strange part about it yeah but
i'm also kind of hearing that
apparently people benefited from your
nakedness
uh yes i would i would i would agree
agree with that notion i think that's
weird man yeah
definitely definitely so yeah so that
was that was everyone's experience and i
think it was great to
hear that um folks had a a very positive
um experience listening to that so i'm
happy about that portion of it for sure
yeah and and just you know it's
interesting um and
what do you go by again uh i go by abba
normally that's yeah that's the thing
so abby you know just hearing you
now i'm sort of remembering how um
protective you are of other people it's
kind of interesting like
you know you you kind of you're it's
subtle but like the way that you're kind
of saying you know i appreciate that
other people are getting helped but i'm
also kind of acknowledging that
underneath that is sort of the
i was still naked and it feels really
awkward for me
yes yeah yeah that that feeling i don't
think any ever really goes away from me
uh because i'm still a fairly private
person even though i do
online stuff you know normally like
pictures of my family or things like
that that's going on my life i don't
really share with the whole world so to
share that sure
i think it was something that was good
for folks but i think for me it's always
trying to find that good line between
how much sharing is too much can you
hold on just one second i'm getting a
call from my
producer no worries go ahead thank you
very much
i appreciate it i might be peeking or
something like that i i only got uh
filters on my stream so
so so abba let me ask you guys this may
sound like a kind of a weird question
because i get that we're you know having
this conversation now but
um how do you feel about coming back and
maybe talking about something else and
and kind of being once again vulnerable
in front of
you know um i think i do things that
matter to me and so i think for me it's
fun to do them provided there's a
purpose to them i i wouldn't do this
gratuitously
so i think as long as there's a there's
a end goal in mind and there's something
you know i think the conversation is
beneficial i think it's something that
people could gain from then i'm fine
with having it on this kind of platform
okay okay so i'm really hearing that
there's sort of a greater good to be
served here
yeah yeah yeah yeah definitely i think
there's a lot of people who identify
with some of the issues that i've
mentioned
in the email so you know it's something
i've discussed on my platform before so
i think having your take on it and a bit
of a back and forth would benefit a lot
of people
so you're doing this for other people uh
partially i think it's also good for me
uh
it's interesting i feel like with this
issue specifically i mean the one
regarding to
to to some of men's issues i think
i think i'm i'm okay with things in a
sense that i don't need a sense of
catharsis like i think i've gotten mine
per se
um but i see you know
it's weird because a lot of men you know
hit me up and they're like you're my
mentor and i'm like
i didn't sign up for all that but i
think
it's because i identify with some of the
stuff that we talk about and it it's
like it's on the first time for a lot of
them that they've heard it
so i recognize some folks do do need it
yeah
um yeah you're so precise with your
language and your thought you know it's
it's
it's interesting it you know yeah well
uh thank you i appreciate that i mean
just kind of like
when you say yeah i mean it i appreciate
it a lot
um and i'm also noticing abba maybe this
isn't really what
we kind of signed up for today and so we
don't have to talk about it but
i'm hearing also like a theme of like
people
um you know like here you are mentoring
people that you've never heard of and
and you know opening people's eyes to
things and you know
having them feel like touched and
they're growing and then you're you're
kind of like bewildered
and and i'm just a little bit curious
about um
you know what kind of expectation or
pressure or like how do you
you know how do you deal with that um
and i know it's kind of separate from
maybe what we're going to be talking
about today but it's just it's so
interesting because i'm hearing that
theme kind of pop
up over and over like what are you to
people and and how do you
sit with what you are for other people
yeah well you know
i definitely get a sense of imposter
syndrome mostly because i don't think
i've
really had proper mentors most of my
life and so the idea of being a mentor
to somebody else is definitely
a little intimidating at times um and
and it doesn't feel consensual in some
ways this sets that up
i didn't choose this i didn't accept
anything but you you have these
expectations
and i think i'm managing it by by
reminding myself that i matter
and that my well-being matters so if it
ever becomes too much to take time and
to
embrace that and i think i also manage
it by
accepting that i i've i've in a sense
already been doing it with the things
that i'm doing so i just need to keep
doing that
you know and i don't have to pile on
myself a large amount of extra work
because i think what i've been doing is
enough for a lot of tricks
well said really well said and once
again well thought out
nuanced you know that you're okay doing
this
and then there are certain boundaries
that you're going to maintain and
respect
and that you know cool so what did you
want to talk about in terms of men's
issues today
um i sent a video that i kind of
summarized that had you had an
opportunity to watch it by any chance no
so i actually purposely go into this
stuff blind
blind okay yeah the other reason is
because um sometimes i hate the idea of
feeling redundant
with some of the stuff but i guess it is
good to explain it for folks who haven't
seen it
um well if it's short we could also just
watch it together if you want
no no it's about 10 minutes so probably
best for me to just explain it but um
but my pet peeve with with these kinds
of discussions is also feels like when
they're had
uh if you talk about it too often people
will start to be like oh here he goes
again on this topic and uh
you know i never want to seem whiny
because in my day-to-day life i don't
think this is something i necessarily
talk about that often but when i'm on
the internet it seems to come up a lot
um yeah so
are you familiar with the with the red
pill community uh yeah at least in terms
of the dating sense yeah
um and so some people would like sent me
links and they they asked for my
critique of it and how toxic some of it
may be what not
and um essentially the the rebuttal i
had
was that i think for a long time men
haven't had spaces on any kind of
platforms or media
to see their issues and their problems
reflected in any kind of form
and they also oftentimes haven't had
too many opportunities for guidance on
how to approach women
on how to date effectively on you know
especially
when you're expected to make the first
step and to kind of put yourself out
there and a lot of the times like
it's not that much guidance for uh young
men
and i know it's an issue that i dealt
with for a long time and so i say that
uh
essentially even though um i think the
community has
issues and some of the rhetoric isn't
always good i think there is no
alternative for a lot of men or they
feel like there isn't one
and therefore until something is
presented i think the idea of
taking down the one space where men see
these topics reflected
uh wouldn't be a good idea that's the
gist of it
can you just um help me understand or
just help with people
who don't understand what red pill is
can you just explain
explain it yes yeah yeah yeah so it's
born from the
matrix and the idea of the red pill
versus the blue pills like
neo the main character gets a choice
between choosing to see the world for
what it is the truth with the red pill
or blue pill which is to stay in this
kind of virtual reality fiction type
world
and so the term uh had a political
meaning for some time
just for people who want to see the
truth in life in general but over the
last like i would say seven or
eight years um in a dating sense
a lot of men go there for pickup artist
stuff
you know seeing the world for what it is
in the sense uh
like how women are doing really well and
men are failing
so that's some of the ideas that would
be common in the red pill dating yeah
yeah so i i'm really um i'm really
excited for this conversation because
this is actually one of my favorite
things to think about
and my favorite things to talk about
okay why is that
i you know it's it's it's interesting
i'm not quite sure but
about two years ago i sent an email to
like a group of like close friends of
mine
just trying to figure out like what's
like i felt like something is happening
with men
and it for me it started actually in a
really bizarre way
i was doing um i was working in a prison
and i was uh you know doing therapy with
something like an
inmate and i was talking to him and he
was in
in prison for dealing drugs um
and so as we kind of like started
talking and i started getting to know
him
so it turned out that he had three older
sisters and
his older sisters kind of said to him
that you know like it's your job as like
the man of the family
to like provide and so here he is at
like
16 and he's expected to provide for
you know three older sisters or they're
they're sort of
telling him that and so he's not really
kind of sure
like how to go about doing that feels
kind of overwhelmed but there is like
one opportunity within his community so
he's like
low a socioeconomic status um also like
an
ethnic minority and and so started
you know dealing and then kind of got
caught you know had a couple of
infractions i was meeting him when he
was like 24 or 23
yeah and so we kind of talked about it
and then he sort of like felt this
big big burden like his biggest issue
like when he was talking about being
depressed is like
i have to provide and it's like my
responsibility to provide
and the really bizarre thing is that a
few months later i was
working with um you know like a
middle-aged investment banker
and like the same words were coming out
of his mouth
yeah and it just struck me as like
bizarre that
these two people from so different
backgrounds actually oddly enough the
investment banker's background was
actually not very different from these
kids which is interesting
um so also grew up like poor and
and things like that and and just so
interesting that
that like these two people from such
different walks of like
life like different ethnicities um you
know somewhat different backgrounds very
different you know day-to-day
experiences of life
we're essentially like suffering from a
common problem and that just struck me
as very strange
and and it caused me to really like stop
and think a little bit about like
you know how um
with all the discussions of privilege
and stuff like that that you could
kind of say like how can you even
compare those but just
you can certainly say that these people
aren't similar at all
but just as a therapist you know part of
what i try to do is like see the person
behind all of the labels and
skip color of their skin and things like
that and what really shocked me was that
you know if i closed my eye if i made a
transcript of each session
and i went back and read them i would
not know which person i was talking to
just based on the transcript of their
words yeah
and so something about that i realized
like something is going on here like i
don't know what but there's like a
bizarre like it's so
and and i realize that the further apart
that these people
appear to be the bigger the issue is
because it's gotta it's gotta
you know bridge the gap of these vastly
different
experiences um and so i started to just
kind of
talk to people and sort of explore and
things like that and
and it's been just really fascinating to
sort of try to figure out
you know for essentially a privileged
class like why do men suffer so much why
why is the suicide rate you know why do
four out of three or four
three out of four or four out of five
people who kill themselves or men
um and so you know what like i feel like
we're missing something here and that
there's something going on that there's
actually a lot of like
evidence for but that people don't talk
about
yeah well i think i think it's an
oversimplification of the issue in the
sense that
we love to look at things as hierarchies
that are very clear-cut in the sense
like we got a pyramid
we got we got men at the top and then we
got women right below and then we got
people who are minorities and then we
got people are disabled right
but the truth is uh i think when people
internalize these issues and people
won't live these issues they don't
necessarily live
on a macro scale things happen on a
micro skills and so
you know even when i try to have these
discussions for example and you say the
problem seems very vast and complex
i think it's a lot more simple in the
sense that
as a whole men deal with certain issues
but because they're perceived as the
privileged class a lot of that is
underserved and it's rarely
discussed in a sense so you know when i
talk about this stuff and people are
like well women suffer more i'm like i
don't disagree that women may have more
problems inciting that means
but when i'm dealing with problems and
they're very real whether it be
depression or my friends killing
themselves or things like that
i internalize things on a micro scale i
internalize things on an individual
basis i can't think of like men as a
whole
i'm thinking about man people around me
are dying my male friends are dying
that's what i see
and so you can understand concepts on a
macro level but i think
seeing the folks as individuals is
important this because it makes you
realize that
even though a perceived class can can
have these advantages and they're quite
real
on an individual scale the suffering can
be just as
heavy if that makes sense you know
and i think that's important and to me
what you said about like the investment
banker
and the dues on the drugs like it's not
surprising you know as my income level
has changed and as i've spent time
from the military to civilian life and
stuff i'm like it's the same problems
it's really not that drastically
different i see a lot of the same
patterns
in regards to that idea of male
responsibility um
and feeling the need to provide even
though i'm a middle child and i got
older sisters
you know i have that exact same
responsibility but i'm supposed to take
care of my mom
i'm supposed to take care of my siblings
you know and they haven't
didn't even have to explicitly say i
just feel like that is my response that
is my burden to bear
um and so i think a lot of this stuff is
just understood
on the side of the level for all men
irrespective of income level
yeah so what what do you think is the
problem abba
help me understand your understanding of
the situation
and i think i think men are expected to
do these things we're just often
ill-equipped
and not given any guidance on how to do
them do what whether
uh from everything from making the first
move and being a leader like
you know the whole idea of leading even
within a small
like just within a relationship like
that expectation
is definitely imposed on us through
dating standards through
media imagery um and then even if you
take it from
a work standpoint you know meeting a
certain level of income the idea of what
success for a man looks like
is to defeat others in a way uh and to
be better
and when you consider all these
expectations it's like okay i'm 18 i
just finished high school
i don't know how to approach we're going
to be good at it i don't know
how to make money i get anxiety about
the idea of like how am i going to take
care of the people around me i got to
take care of a wife and a girlfriend
and kids um and so those are the
girlfriend wow i know imagine both at
the same time depending on culture right
um yeah so those expectations are
are quite the cross to bear when there's
no resources on how to do it that's what
i think
okay so what what are the expectations
that you
feel so i'm also hearing kind of a
threat you talked about
red pill and you know red pill is a i
still remember when i was back in
college like a couple of my friends got
into the pickup artist scene
yeah and and so it's it's been
interesting to see the
evolution of like pickup artists
into red pill into i think in cell
like i think that there's a lot of
common sort of threats there
and uh so so what are the expectations
that you
feel like you've been placed upon your
shoulders without
insufficient i mean without sufficient
guidance
um the the two things that come to mind
right away
are one two to to lead to
uh kind of be the trailblazer to be the
one who
is going to take charge of a situation
you know uh that's one and the second
thing would be
just in a romantic sense um
just the idea of knowing how to court
somebody
you know because i think a lot of us are
often starved for affection or do want
that kind of like reciprocity in terms
of love and things like that
but speaking to most men i know they
don't know how to do it
they don't know how to start that
initiative and they get so much anxiety
and nervousness about it it's like
like what do you know and they know
nothing and i'm like i'm not surprised
because i knew nothing at 18 or 19 or
20.
and yeah so those would be like two
prime examples i can think of on top of
my head
and so can you tell us a little bit
about um
uh can you tell us just a little bit
about
your kind of sense of what not knowing
how to court someone at 18 sort of felt
like
and kind of where you are now and what
that journey has been like
oh man oh man so you talk about the pick
up fire stuff i i picked up on that
you know i the one thing i had in the
sense was like thankfully for me and my
case like a rejection didn't
like murder my self-esteem uh but uh
back in the day before like a lot of the
tinder stuff really got really popular
uh we just had to go up to
to women and try to be like hi i think
you're gorgeous right or whatever
and um i remember what my first couple
rejections felt like just just
just being like oh man oh
i just brutal brutal brutal brutal stuff
i remember one time i um
i asked this girl at my gym and she
accepted she's like yeah you know i get
off on friday
at five so you can just come meet me
there and i was like cool and uh
and friday came along and i text her in
the morning but she didn't respond but
i'm like it's okay we already agreed on
the spot so i'll just go there
and i came around when her shift ended
which is like 5 p.m
and waited outside and uh texted up like
hey i'm outside she still didn't respond
i just remember her walking out with
another dude and get in the car and
leaving
anywhere he got in the cabin i remember
jumping into the bushes to hide
just brutal stuff man um just the idea
of being in a club you know and going up
to a girl and
and be like hey and just very very
mildly
and you know they they they snap
and and to be clear i just want to say
this i i don't get mad at
um some people who take
will reject very aggressively because i
understand sometimes during the night
you might get approached 100 times and
it can be very
taxing to have to say no to people who
constantly want something from me but
as a dude to try to approach very kindly
just to hear that just be like no and
it's like
yelled in a way that everyone else can
hear it's just you just slunk and i've
seen it happen so many people around me
so
um yeah yeah even if i look back on it i
just
sometimes i still cringe yeah i'm
curious what did it
what did it feel like when you know you
saw her walk out of the gym with another
dude
uh shame embarrassment uh
inadequacy those are like a couple of
words that come to mind
yeah yeah yeah yeah did you ask yourself
did you actually hide
oh yeah yeah i hit because uh the way it
works is they got a loop around in the
cab to come by
and i was standing right beside the
bushes and so i was far enough to see
them
and i'm oh man yeah i don't want it
brutal i jumped in those bushes
yeah because i felt so embarrassed you
know what i mean i was like here i am
for a date she's leaving some other dude
you know
so i uh so yeah i remember being 19 of
that happening
i'll never forget that there's always
one of those stories i'm like
yeah i i have a fair number of cringe
stories myself
um and and so then what you know so
how did you being such a thoughtful guy
how did you like think about you know
what
how did you approach that so like you
clearly saw like there's a problem here
right
like and and what did you understand was
the problem at 19.
i just felt like i had no idea what i
was doing
like i i didn't i felt like i had no
game plan i didn't feel
it sounds like yeah yeah yeah that's
really what it was i had no game
one thing i had going in my favor was
like even if i took a huge
l like that i i would be fine with going
back the next day and trying again with
somebody different you know sure
um so i think that's what but i know
dudes who get that once and it was over
and
my problem was i just didn't have any
skill set to understand
because i feel like now where i'm at i
can understand way more variables
than what i could then i couldn't read
the social cues i didn't understand
what it looked like when someone was
interested or what they weren't little
signs that i could pick up on to
better handle the situation uh and
at 19 i just didn't have that skill set
so i would go in blind and i would leave
blind and just with a bunch of things i
saw and i can't make sense of so
that was my issue at the time and how
did you think about approaching it like
you know what did you think about what
were you going to do about it like
you're like okay i'm blind
yeah i'm going to look for for guidance
i'm going to look for for for
instructions you know
i come from a gamer background when you
can't figure something out you look for
a walk-through
you know yeah absolutely so it was the
same idea i just
i needed some advice and you know i'm
sure folks google this on all ends how
do i make someone like me or how do i do
this right we all looking for answers to
find acceptance for somebody and that's
what i did
and did you feel like uh you kind of
alluded to the fact that maybe you
didn't have
sort of personal guidance or kind of
mentorship sort of growing up
so did you feel like you there wasn't
anyone you could kind of talk to in your
personal life that could maybe guide you
like yeah i think it's twofold i think i
didn't have that and secondly i think i
would have felt shame to ask someone
directly that i'm like i feel inadequate
approaching women you know yeah i think
it's those two things
because it's kind of it sounds pathetic
like man i don't know how to approach
ghosts to somebody
you know yeah it doesn't sound great
yeah so i think a lot of people look for
those resources but don't want to admit
that they're looking for them
so so i think that too uh if you know
just what i'm hearing there is there's
actually like a really subtle
expectation there yeah that it is oddly
enough
everyone's ignorant and it's completely
unacceptable to be ignorant
even amongst men that would be shameful
to another dude it would be like so
pathetic if you're like
hey man how do you pick up chicks like i
don't know how to pick up chicks
yeah yeah and then they'd look at you
and they'd be like you're a loser
yeah and even worse than that i've
watched
guys go up to folks in clubs right and
and just go very kindly it's like hey
can i get you a drinking
girl says no and i understand that but
sometimes i would hear the girls
afterwards like
i was such a [ __ ] creep and and and
the guy would be with an earshot to hear
it but i was just
like oh he just doesn't know what he's
doing and
and i and i think oftentimes women don't
know
how much we don't know what we're doing
and sometimes a lack of skills is seen
as
predatory or somehow like very gross and
disgusting when it's just like man
i feel bad for the hobie like he's he's
21 this is his first time inside a club
he doesn't know
so yeah yeah i feel bad i feel oh yeah i
feel bad
yeah i can see it i can see there's
something you know you're really
resonating with something there
because that was me so i know what he's
thinking you know i know what he's
feeling right now that when you
when you get rejected the the the the
dejection that you feel afterwards
and i'm not talking about when someone
says no to you on tinder because you
know
even that's manageable you're in the
privacy of your own home i think that's
why a lot of people actually don't
you know go up to folks in person as
much anymore is because they have
they can better preserve themselves by
doing things online but
when i used to watch it all the time it
was very difficult to watch at times
yeah i think tinder has its own set of
you know toxicity but
what i'm really hearing from you is that
there's sort of this expectation of
competence from both your male peers
and from the women that you approach
that like you should know how to do this
better
like yeah even looking at the idea like
men have to be the leaders of the
household and that's like a common thing
that people
still hold on to despite the fact that
women are extremely successful in terms
of like
i think they're outpacing men for
degrees now and and out earning men
coming straight out of university and
college so
there's still that idea that men still
got to do all this stuff even though
they seem to be failing perpetually and
gradually getting worse in some regards
and so even just that expectation is
daunting for a lot of men
yeah you know this is kind of i don't
want to charge
the discussion but one thing that i've
noticed is really interesting is that
you know sometimes being a psychiatrist
i get the opportunity to ask
men and women sort of personal questions
about their
you know who they would date and things
like that it's a common
concern and i'm really surprised by um
the
you know the high high percentage of
women that
uh really feel like if a man is not
financially successful
that they're not an acceptable like
partner
um and and the interesting thing is that
when i talk you know so
i feel like oftentimes i hear keep in
mind this isn't data or anything that's
just anecdotal
could have a lot to do with the
selection bias and the you know the
people who wind up in my office
um but that it's kind of completely
acceptable to
a lot of my male patients that they have
a partner that doesn't
earn money and that a homemaker is like
a laudable position but
women that that i have as patients don't
really feel the same way they're
actually very few
um but some of them you know are okay
with that yeah
yeah so that's good that's been my
experience and and um
i don't think it's necessarily wrong or
evil i i'm this is not a critique of a
woman or anything like that
to me it just speaks to the expectation
that's placed on men to
live up to a certain role um and
and and yeah if you look at the
hierarchy of needs uh like within data
but if you don't want to go there we
don't have to it's like yeah there is
that expectation on much of a societal
level even in like a
as progressive as countries as you can
imagine there's still a lot of those uh
same roles uh being existing
you know the interesting thing just to
toss this out speaking of anecdotal
experiences when i talk to
women about who they're accepted
who they're willing to date the
interesting thing is that half of their
hesitation doesn't come from a personal
standard and actually now that i think
about it
comes from a societal standard yeah so
it's it's more about like
you know what are my parents gonna think
kind of thing
yeah um and
anyway yeah it's interesting yeah
um so and then what what did you
do about it so it sounds like you
googled how do i get someone to like you
and what else did you do about
you know learning how to do this thing i
had nobody i felt like i could talk to
about this kind of stuff
because of the shame so i think i went
on to online forums and internet
because one it gave me anonymity and two
it reflected my lived experience
so with those two things i was like okay
i'm not alone in this which is already a
great feeling
other people feel super inadequate like
me and we could talk it out and kind of
share ideas
and then the third thing is then
afterwards i was led to some resources
um i don't know if you've ever heard of
the show there's a show that used to be
called keys to the vip
lasted i think three seasons it was a
show where you know
two guys would be sent to a nightclub
and they would you know be asked to
you know try to pick up women and try to
do so in creative ways
and i would watch every episode just so
i'm like oh okay i'm i'm
i'm learning you know uh and it got
cancelled uh obviously because some
people felt the show was unacceptable in
that regards even though these guys
weren't being pigs or anything weird
um what kind of stuff were they doing
ah they go up and then sometimes they
would pretend that they were deaf and
they did
like can i get they'd have to write on a
cute car to see if they could talk to
the person they would basically handicap
themselves
they would handicap themselves to see
like see how i can do it how easy it is
so um it would be stuff like that and a
lot of times i would just be out there
laughing
um and so yeah it was just that would be
the kind of stuff that they were doing
and um i think i think the idea of
picking up women is just revolting to
people you know
like learning skills we're expected to
be confident
but learning skills to do it is seen as
gross or trying too hard
that's like the the weird dichotomy i
see
yeah so i think some of that has to do
with what the implication of picking up
women is
you know i think that there's there's
sort of an implication in the pickup
artist community in the red pill
community that
most relationships should be like
relatively temporary and and
be especially in the red pill community
it seems like there's sort of a
it's a zero-sum game so the more you get
out of the relationship the more she
loses
um and vice versa right like in the red
pill community there's a winner and a
loser and either you're the loser in the
relationship or you're the winner in the
relationship
um but but i i think that you know
picking up women sort of has a certain
connotation to it which i think evokes
i i i mean when you say picking up women
i don't
hear i don't assume that that means
you're looking for a girlfriend
what do you think i think if you use
that term
no yeah you know to me to me just
strikes me as like
bad branding in this sense because if
you think about all those dudes who did
most of that pick up our stuff they're
all married with kids or they've all had
to settle down
um and well a lot of the ones that i
used to follow often times too and even
people i follow within the red pill
community advocate for the ideas of
relationships and stuff like that
though i can't understand that
connotation and there's definitely been
you know bad examples
and in bad representation that regards i
would argue
that the idea of being in a relationship
and being married is definitely
wanted by most men even within those
communities it's just uh
i don't think it's necessarily put to
the forefront or prioritized or
it's not nearly as appealing in terms of
the brochure for why you would apply do
you know what i mean
yeah absolutely i think the brochure
i mean there's i have a lot of thoughts
um we're actually hopefully coming out
with a research paper on some of the
stuff
in the next couple months um but
i so let's just i'm just a little bit
curious about your personal journey so
like what happened next
yeah um you know i think as i
started being more bold and started
just trying different things i would
once again still fail a tremendous
amount but
i started to feel like i was
the affection or interest i would show
towards women would be reciprocated more
often so i was like oh this stuff is
working
uh and you know i think as you
get more involved with that stuff um
then you start to to fall on some pit
traps uh i
i would say that i got to a point where
it's like it's like when you're when you
want something for so long and you're
starved for it and then you get it you
don't know how to
hold the floodgate so i think i just
started dating way too often i was doing
too much and i was too
engrossed in the idea of of wanting to
be liked
um so i think that became something that
i was really involved i was dating all
the time i was
going out i was on tinder so um
yeah i was like oh i can do this now i
can do what a lot of dudes can't do so
i'm not going to stop and
uh yeah so i'm going to kind of ask you
i have a
this is a sort of a hypothesis-driven
question but
so when you say it it was working or it
worked what do you think
was working what do you think was
responsible for your
change in fortune like it sounds like
you were able to date a lot
you know was it the pickup artist kind
of like was it watching this tv show or
like
how did you learn to get better
um repetition i'm going to be honest
it was repetition and
um coming more into myself and being
able to share more of myself with folks
uh that was it because i feel like when
you have all this anxiety
and you're constantly nervous and you're
getting in your own way they don't get
to see you they just see
confusion and i and i think i just felt
much more calm
in circumstances uh when i had
conversations it wasn't necessarily
somebody i was trying to
date or be sleep with it was i'm just
talking to a person and i think as i
got to that sense of comfort then it was
fine yeah
so i i that was sort of what i was
imagining yeah that's been sort of
you know in a sense my experience
although it's very limited
and really like observing other people's
experiences
right um is that there isn't sort of a
magic trick it really is
about kind of being your best self
um and you know the more that you can
just be your best self like people will
be
you know that's going to be attractive
to hopefully some people
usually some people yeah but it's
getting there
it's getting there that's the problem
it's getting there it's a problem and
when you feel an adequate
you know it's like you first it's like
this even with artistic
approaches to to like singing or dancing
you you start off by imitating others
and then as you do so through that
process you start to find your own voice
and i felt like dating is like that too
like you know or like approaching and me
you know breaking that ice that tension
that awkwardness
it's very difficult at first if you have
nothing to lean on that's what i found
yeah and and so then what happened it
sounded like you were dating quite
successfully
yeah you'd become you you'd become the
chad of your dreams
yeah yeah we didn't have that
terminology back then but yeah yeah i
suppose so
and then how did you what was that like
for you
it was just a lot of excess it was just
too much of of
of something that's not the best way i
could describe it what do you mean by
that can you help us understand a little
bit
uh yeah it's just too much time too much
energy
um it's like i got lost in the sauce you
know i
my day would be spent and the day would
pass by i'm like what did i do today
okay
and i just and a lot of it was
meaningless like which
not everything has to be meaningful but
i think i value my time
and as i discovered other things that i
was passionate about interested in i
started to realize my priorities weren't
in the right place
i um yeah i was too busy chasing a high
if you will i think that's yeah
i felt it was the the mark of a true
chat is to be like oh i'm dating too
much
yeah yeah yeah yeah i know i know and i
have this conversation all the time
because like people who who haven't been
there are like yeah you're just saying
that i'm like
it's hard for me to tell them that the
grass is not green on the other side if
they haven't been there
uh because their whole life they've been
told this is the ideal thing to go for
so yeah yeah and and what i'm hearing is
that you know you got to the other side
you thought the grass was greener and
you're like actually this isn't
yeah yeah same thing happened to all my
friends too all my friends had the same
experience
and that experience was dating a lot and
dating intensively and
yeah yeah they were starved for
for females attention and then
afterwards once they got it
and they they started being very
gratuitous with it they realized like oh
this is not that great and i was like i
know
we had this conversation but sometimes
you got to experience it to understand
it so i try not to be too preachy about
it
and then what happened um
okay so i think i need to go backwards a
little bit as you start to enter the red
pill environment you know one idea is
like you see the truth of what it is
you're not supposed to go up to a girl
just like
here's some flowers you know like
there's a way you can come with some
confidence and things like that
to garner that affection but then that
also
trickles into more political uh
discussions about
you know what are men's struggles and
why you're struggling and
why is the city society is built this
way and what your burden and
responsibility are
and how women really are so you'd hear
that kind of rhetoric a lot and that
would be engrossed into some of the
um pickup artist ideas that you would
hear about often
so as i would hear that it began to
i would i would sometimes within my
dating experiences have things happen
that i was like
what was that you know whether it be
being groped or
uh women being physically uh abused i
don't like using the word abusive but
you know like getting slapped
for a disagreement you know within like
a dating context i was like
how do you feel this comfortable hitting
me in front of other people and when i
would bring this up to folks i would be
almost often gaslit into thinking like
oh this is not that big of a deal and
i'm like and i'm someone who
i really dislike it when people put
their hands on me
in a non like in a non-intimate sense
you know when they do it as a sense of
control whether or a sense of like
aggression
it triggers me to to a point i can't
explain even if it's like little stuff
like
like oh i don't have to you know just
little things like that can really set
me off and
i couldn't under imagine me grabbing
somebody when they didn't want to be
grabbed or
and i would see this stuff and when i
would bring it up to people and i would
see the nightclubs and stuff like that
i'm just like
and the only time i ever saw that issue
reflected or people talking about
some of the comfort that people feel
touching others i was when i was in the
red pill community so
it started warping my perception of um
of women to some degree and uh made me
resentful
um even the idea that i had to be the
one who makes the first move and i had
to be
the one who puts my self-esteem on the
line when i go up to somebody i'm like
hey i'm really interested in
and i get yelled at and i'm supposed to
just accept that that's my job as a man
to do that
i became resentful of like the the
burden that society placed on me and i
think
that community kind of fueled it with
some of the ideas because i found other
people
who felt the exact same way uh and so
you have this like kind of echo chamber
and
as i grew older i decided to kind of
slink away from that because i started
to realize it was clouding my judgment
how did you make that realization it was
progressive you know i i i'd like to
believe
that i'm introspective enough to
acknowledge when i'm holding on to a bad
idea
and i was questioned on things i can't
tell you an exact moment but i remember
being questioned on certain things and
i would sit with those ideas and i'm
like if i look at this logically it
doesn't make sense
and so i just had to re-examine things
uh you know
try to study a little bit and be like am
i holding on to this because
it's it's reflective of some of my
experiences and and
you know am i holding on to this due to
like
anger resentment or am i holding on to
this because it's a sound idea and i
think just a bit of that reflection kind
of made me realize you weren't
there were great ideas yeah so you know
it's it's kind of
staggering but i want to share like one
or two experiences that really terrified
me
so i one time was talking to a sexual
assault victim who was
um uh you know
a tall
you know well-built man who was
um sexually assaulted by like a five
foot three woman
and uh they were at a party and she um
basically climbed on top of him
and he felt really scared and like he
felt like you know he couldn't explain
to other people that like
because they would look at the physical
difference and they would say how on
earth could you
not defend yourself in that situation
yep
and then so i i asked him i was like you
know when people sit like so i just
asked him
why didn't you feel like you could
defend yourself and he was like if i
defended myself my chances of going to
jail were so much higher
because what would it look like if i if
i like pick her up
and throw her off like like she was
persistent like he pushed her away
she didn't and she falls awkwardly yep
and and so like what is like is he
supposed to hit her across the face
like he can absolutely physically
overpower her he can knock her
unconscious
but what happens then um
and and so he felt incredibly powerless
incredibly
he felt stuck like he couldn't do
anything about it
um and so it was it was just really
i never until i you know until i heard
him say something like that i had never
thought you know i never thought about
that
yeah yeah there's a there's a layer even
above that i
am there's this one lady who i knew who
was a
teacher at a at a school she basically
taught like the
progressive ideas of um gender studies
and uh me and her some conversations in
the past and i remember on new year's
eve i think it's like 2018.
i was uh i was at a club and and she
came up to me and she was like oh it's
good to see you i'm good to see you as
well
and um she's a little bit intoxicated i
was very sober and she kind of
approached me
trying to get close and i was like i'm
i'm not interested in i remember like
just before the countdown hit i was
heading towards the bathroom she was
coming out of it she said oh good to see
you and i'm like yeah good to see you as
well
and and she just went right away and
groped me right and
i remember being like what are you doing
and she immediately just lunged at me to
make out right
and and as her lifts my mind i pushed
her off um
and i just remember thinking like what
just happened right now right
and
maybe a week later i just remember
seeing her on social media just talking
about boundaries and how it's important
for men to respond i just
i remember being so angry at that moment
i remember he's so mad
and and i think it kind of reflected an
experience that i had in my life where i
i would look at things that would happen
like that
and the the really difficult thing for
me was accepting that
some of the women who would do this
stuff weren't necessarily bad people
you know like whether it be slapping a
guy or things like that when they get
really angry they weren't necessarily
bad people
but i also saw how nobody held them
accountable when they did some of these
things
because of the perceived size difference
because of the idea that
a man being hit really doesn't have any
implications or his boundaries being
violated doesn't really
matter you know and
i when i had a conversation with one
person i was like do you not realize
that you
are doing something wrong when you put
your hands on me that way and the person
has to sit with it and come to the real
understanding like oh i did something
[ __ ] up
but it dawned on me that this person at
27 had never been told that before
and it felt comfortable doing that in
the past and it was like
we got a bigger problem this is not just
a matter of like individuals it's also a
matter of like messaging and
and and and how we have these
conversations
you know every guy i've ever spoken to
could tell me of experiences where
they've had
people place their hands on them you
know from the opposite section um
and they just they just never talk about
it like uh it is what it is
i'm like oh okay yeah yeah
yeah that was a tough one it was a tough
one to be like i can't hate this person
because they're not evil
but that what they do what they're doing
is terrible
yeah so what i'm i'm hearing is that you
know also like it in a sense i i think
you can't really blame someone if you
never give them feedback
and what i'm hearing is that people
aren't really getting feedback
that yeah it's it's hard though it's
hard to give someone feedback who
violated your boundaries because then it
means that you as a man have to accept
the idea that
someone did something wrong to you which
is not a conversation you want to have
like i don't even like to refer to it as
abuse
even though by definition it would
technically be categorized like that's
not how i perceived it but
you know it is what it is and to have
that conversation should mean
i have to relive that and then i also
have to confront them which is
why don't you see it as abuse
maybe maybe it's more so because of my
response to it isn't like
to me just i guess this is how i
interpret it but maybe i'm lying to
myself i just
see it as like blatantly disrespectful
that's what i think when i
when i think back to that experience i
would never do that to you i would never
like
not care about your boundaries so much
that i would just do that i just
couldn't imagine
but for you to do that like where do you
get off feeling that comfortable and i
think that's why i don't necessarily
categorize abuse because i didn't feel
necessarily
violated per se so i think that's why i
would see them
and maybe that's wrong but that's just
my perception of it
and so where so it sounds like you kind
of cooled off on dating you had a couple
of
relatively you know negative experiences
here and there like where are you
nowadays
oh things are really peaceful you know
like i i think one thing i value within
my day in life now is just um
peacefulness you know not that there's
never conflict but that we can like
get through this stuff in in a in a
peaceful way if you will
and um it's good
it's good um i
i don't feel any compulsive needs like i
used to i mean you know sometimes the
ego flares up and you want to dabble a
little bit but
for the most part things are pretty
quiet and i'm kind of grateful for that
because i get to put my
energy towards things that matter a
little bit more and then i don't like
that
um you know about this may sound a
little bit weird but you know we're
talking about how people don't have
guidance and i'm curious is there
something that
um you want guidance on now
like um
i think for me in the next chapter of my
day in life my relationship
i think it's just a matter of going
through it i don't think i necessarily
need
guidance at the moment per se i just
i just constantly see people suffering
and they're coming to me with their
suffering and i'm just like man there's
a lot a lot of people are going through
what i went through before so
i think that's more and what is it what
is it that they're going through
uh that feeling of inadequacy that
feeling of not knowing you know we do
these call-in shows and
and every day without fail i get i've
been surprised by this i get 16 to 21
year olds hitting me up like i don't
know what i'm doing and i feel not
confident and i feel like i suck
and i just want to give up on this all
together what do you say to them
i tell them to have patience with
themselves because this is going to proc
is a process
and i also remind them like if you don't
put yourself out there there's no chance
for you to really have any sense of
success in this regard you know like
you can't shield yourself from from love
and also get the benefits of it you have
to
take some form of a leap so to give up
is not in your best interest but also
understand you have a lot of time ahead
of you
even though the world tells you as an 18
year old you're an adult and you need to
know what you're doing like most 18 year
olds don't know
you know and so just to be patient with
themselves and to to remind themselves
that there's time for them to to grow
and and so that's a great response i
think it's it's kind of interesting
because there's also sort of like uh i
don't know if this is
maybe this is my own bias where i i'm
interpreting what you're saying is
having a certain like masculine quality
you know of and maybe that's unfair
maybe it's
it's neither masculine or feminine but
just human is really when i stop and
think about it but i noticed that
i had sort of a masculine response to
that which is like that's what men do
right like you got to put yourself
out there you gotta you gotta brave the
danger if you want the reward
yeah and and that's something that you
know sort of a very like masculine ethos
that i think we kind of project but at
the end of the day i don't think it's
really masculine at all it's really just
human
um right and but oddly enough i
i was just surprised a little bit by my
mind's reaction and then
seeing how like how right that felt like
that's a manly thing to say
like when i heard you say like you know
you got to put yourself out there like
sure you can you can't shield yourself
and get the benefit you have to be brave
you have to be courageous yeah um
and like i said i clearly don't i mean i
don't think it applies just to men but
it's interesting
how that's kind of uh you know that's
where we kind of go
you got to be manly bro yeah well i mean
the idea of putting yourself out there
is what men are are repeatedly told all
the time whether it be like making the
first move whether it's protecting your
family and shielding them with your life
whether it's
being the one to provide financially
it's like you're the one who
has to put yourself on the limb in an
outward perspective i think women do it
as well
i think it just doesn't manifest as like
outwardly as
it would with men traditionally i think
that's what it is yeah
and so i want to go back to this like so
someone asked you what you thought about
red pill and what was your answer again
um
i think it is the only
source of resources that
um that men have and i think it has its
imperfections as a community
but some of their ideas are very valid
and um you know
that that was my stance on it it's got
its problems but it's only spot
fermented to hear some of the stuff they
need to hear
and what is it that you think they need
to hear to take accountability
to understand that they have a
responsibility towards
self-improvement if they want the
results that they feel they should get
that they that it's not going to be
handed to them but they have to work
you know i got that from the military
and other stuff they most folks don't
get at that age
you know they don't get at the days they
don't get told like if you want to meet
somebody or find love you have to put in
some work
you know some people just feel entitled
like i'm supposed to find a partner and
i'm supposed to just be
it's like no there's things you got to
do so i think this idea of
accountability and responsibility
towards self-improvement
is two ideas that men desperately want
to hear and want to be told
and this community provides that what
are some of the things in the community
that you think are
not as helpful okay this is when it gets
to the minute stuff because you know
you have so many different voices kind
of writing things so it's hard to
pinpoint one or two things i often agree
with some of the rhetoric that
individuals say
as creators and i think sometimes i push
back on that even the idea of like
um necessarily having to embrace
uh traditional uh gender roles and the
idea that if you don't you're somehow
beta or inferior
or that if you happen to have a wife
who's a little bit more masculine
that makes you somehow less of a man
it's just all these ideas that seem a
little bit too rigid i'm not a big fan
of
so so what i'm it's interesting because
when you when you talk about the
positives
once again i think it's like stuff that
i don't think is really
masculine i think it's human that you
have to take
accountability for your actions and if
you want something in life you probably
have to work towards it
i i agree the issue is they don't get
told that there's nobody there to tell
them that and if nobody's saying that to
them
then they'll go where they can find it
so i think that's the
lament yeah i i i'm not i just i get
what you're saying
yeah so so so the the the reason i kind
of bring that up is because i i'm also
hearing that some of the stuff
that is maybe a little bit more rigid
that you're not on board with
seems in a definition standpoint like
more masculine
like gender roles like it's gendered by
nature
but that that does that make sense
what do you mean what do you mean by
itself so so like you were kind of
talking about how like
you know traditionally like there's an
idea of masculinity if you don't meet
that ideal your beta
so the things that you don't really kind
of agree with as much
are like the things that are inherently
more gendered
sure sure yeah i'm just drawing that
kind of observation right yeah gender
conformative yeah sure
yeah right right so it's kind of
interesting because i i mean i'm with
you in terms of like
people need a place where they can be
supported
um in sort of a compassionate way and
still held accountable
and this is something that you know it's
interesting because in our in our
coaching program part of what
like our values are a little bit weird
because
being nice is not one of them being
polite is not one of them
so one of the things that we actually
work really really hard with our coaches
to train them in is to be authentic and
compassionate
so what that means is like being
authentic is like if you think someone
like if your client is messing up then
you
hold them accountable like you have to
be authentic with them you can't brush
it over
but that that authenticity should be
tempered with compassion
so like it's walking the road of like
not blaming them
but also holding them accountable like
be like hey man like you're kind of
you know you're kind of screwing up here
like let's work on that
but like not let it slide yeah you know
i think
one thing they do well within the red
community which works for some people
is that they say things authentically in
a way that
they think you need to hear it and that
a lot of people do like so i've heard
coaches be like
what's your problem young man and the
man will be like well you know i'm not
getting girls together like well
all right what's your what's your
physical stature like are you doing well
physically and he's like uh
you know i could stand the workout he's
like are you saying that you're fat and
i remember when he said that to the man
a lot of people in the chat with crazy
like you can't say that but young my mom
you know what i feel like that's what i
needed to hear because i didn't want to
acknowledge it and what i'm saying is
i'm not saying it's necessarily the
right way
what i'm saying is that for some people
they feel like eating that
directly is what they want and i
remember also being an army and like
having people talk to you that way
sometimes is the thing that you need in
some circumstances and so
um what you thought about in terms of
authenticity and saying things
and holding people accountably
accountable they definitely have that a
lot in the uh
in that community yeah so i in my
experience you can be
you can certainly temper it with
compassion and you know
you know i i think i think there are a
lot of things and maybe i'm wrong here
but there are a lot of things that i say
to people in interviews that tend to be
clipped out of context and sound really
mean and
you know if you just look at the
transcript it certainly does sound mean
but they're usually said with compassion
which is why people
are okay with it yeah right but you
gotta kind of you gotta
call it what it is you gotta you know if
someone's got cancer you gotta diagnose
it and like face that
that reality before you treat it
yeah um and and so
hmm yeah i mean i feel like we've
i really appreciate kind of everything
that you've shared and i sort of
understand what you're saying i think i
agree with you that
you know men for sure and not to say
that women
that this is an exclusive need of men
which i think is another big problem
with these
kind of gender conversations is that
people tend to draw comparisons
um okay and and so i i think that it's
completely
possible for us because i see this you
know i see
women having gender norms that are
challenging in an uphill struggle
that cause them a lot of personal
suffering and i think that men have
gender norms that are challenging and
suffer and and cause them a lot of
suffering or uphill battle
and somewhere along the way i think some
people feel like there's like
it's a zero-sum game and so the more men
struggle
you're sort of devaluing women's
struggles or vice versa
and i just don't really see it that way
i just kind of think that you know
there are some cases of of male
privilege in some cases of
female privilege there are some cases of
minority privilege and some cases of
majority privilege
it's kind of interesting being india and
i kind of felt this
in a bizarre way in like medicine so
everyone
looks at me and assumes when i'm a
medical student that i'm a doctor
because i'm indian
which is fantastic um but
you know from a standardized test
perspective like in terms of
like the standardized test score that i
need to get is like
20 higher than like other ethnicities
who are underrepresented in medicine
so i have to score above average to be
competitive right um and then still on
my first day
of training at harvard medical school a
third of the room was south asian
and so you know it's like i don't know
whether it's right or wrong i've
certainly felt both sides of it
and in terms of minority privilege and
racism and
yeah all that kind of stuff you know
it's kind of interesting
yeah i i think the issue with this more
than
i agree that everyone has a struggle i
think i think
the problem is i just remember never
having many resources to look towards
whereas when i think when i when i spoke
to women on you
i think they saw themselves in a lot of
like
talk shows for example or resources that
they could look towards
for information and i think you know
it's just the idea of me having to go on
youtube to learn about this stuff in
2012 which is so weird to me
um you know because you can't really
think of like tv talk shows for men or
stuff like that
and and more than just you know you know
what i mean
yeah i was just thinking like what's the
male equivalent of the view
that there is none that's my and i made
the comparison i said joe rogan which is
funny because it just used to be like a
shitty podcast in some dude's basement
and now it's like this worldwide thing
but it's inception it really wasn't um
and and and more than that i think
oftentimes
um it's like
the little that we do have almost feels
like it's constantly being threatened
to be cancelled and so it's just like
you get a little bit defensive
you know uh and so i understand that
uh i mean yeah in terms of like the red
pill community sometimes
diversif deservedly so people just are
gone in terms of like their presence
online
um take the rogan podcast another great
example which is like you know it's been
in the news a few times for
you know people trying to have it
removed from online platforms and so
there's just this perception even if
it's not reality
i'll grandchild could be wrong and this
is anecdotal but there's a perception
that male spaces are not safe
that's how a lot of folks feel and
what's your understanding of of like joe
rogan and like
like why it why it's been in the news
for being cancelled
because it's a male space i'm gonna i'm
gonna draw a parallel
and um there's another individual
creates content online and sometimes
people feel like he
when he's coaching people or when he's
talking to people right um that he
has a strong dislike for for women and
so i
went to go watch his content and i went
to go watch his like coaching with with
men and
a lot of the verbiage was the same i
think sometimes in male space we have a
way of talking and we have a way with
engaging with each other that's often
seen
as unacceptable or wrong
when it's just for some people it's like
it's a perfectly fine temperament
and
i think men feel like they're being
policed in a sense like
does that make sense what i'm saying
sure yeah so but give me an example of
of what you think is like you know just
is the language of men
that other people take offense to or
that other people are trying to police
i couldn't give you an example of like
words we use i could just give you in
terms of like a
like a bluntness so i had the same thing
in the army the way we talk among
soldiers perfectly acceptable
if it ever made it online there was no
way we would keep our jobs but it is how
we speak on a regular basis
it is how we talk to each other you know
behind closed doors or whatever
and so there's this need to hide some of
that constantly
um and to temper our way of being online
uh which would most like that's toxic
and i'm like is it though
or are we just fine with how we talk to
each other so
uh and i've just seen it so much over
the years like shows that i used to love
that i think geared towards men's
experience i remember this one on
on on bet the man show like gone you
know and and and people were like
this kind of talking isn't except i'm
like is it though so i think that's the
perception
even if not accurate that is the
perception that a lot of men have yeah
so i think that's
that's uh i i'd really love to hear some
examples abba because i think it's like
if you're making the argument that
some people behind closed doors say
certain things which they're okay with
with
which other people aren't okay with i
think that there's like
something to really be explored there
right so even if we look at the incel
community
um or like the red pill community so
there's this sense
of so this is part of like what we've
kind of uncovered in our research is
that
you know there's a sense of online drift
so what tends to happen
is that you know we start out like i'll
look at let's say like a jordan peterson
video
on youtube and then what'll happen is
like my youtube will start recommending
other things to me
and depending on what i i click on like
i'm going to go
like down this rabbit hole right
i don't know you just kind of you almost
described jordan peterson as a gateway
it was kind of funny to hear that but
you know
i i i'm not i that wasn't it was i used
him as a good example because like
here's a good example yeah right so so
like what i'm not i'm not making a
judgment or anything i'm saying like
literally from a youtube algorithm
standpoint this is literally what we're
researching
is how online drift occurs so this is
what content creation platforms do so
they curate content and they say like
oh for people who watch jordan peterson
videos like half of them
also like something else and then
half of them like something else and you
also see this in
in political drift right so if i watch
like
fox news like a fox news clip that
is making fox news look good on youtube
then
like youtube will populate with
something else
and then so over time what happens is
like we get and you kind of mention this
echo chamber over time it's kind of
weird i don't think people
realize this is happening but because of
the nature of content
curation and platforms are trying to you
know
do this on purpose we start to be
surrounded by voices that are similar to
our own
sure i agree with that oh notion and
over time as that radicalization happens
i think that like you'll see in some of
these like
you know so then you'll get like the
in-cell subreddit gets banned and things
like that
um and and so what ends up happening is
over time people will like go to
esoteric like further and further
like remove from the front page of the
internet
and then sometimes in those spaces you
know you'll talk about people routinely
discussing things like violence towards
women and stuff like that
and i i imagine that those people feel
very comfortable with their language
behind closed doors
sure um and that people from out you
know on the other side of the door would
find it unacceptable
but you know how do they get from that
point part of it is also your drift but
a part of it is even the more modest
examples sometimes
of like masculine discussions sometimes
get
removed from platforms jordan peterson's
example you used as a starting point but
i remember a time when he would get
you know boot out of universities and
colleges for
for rhetoric which i didn't think was
crazy extreme but that's what i'm
talking about when i say
it almost feels like our language is
being policed is that even the modest
example that you started with
was often being removed from campuses i
remember seeing one guy who went in
for a discussion and they just barred
the doors and so um
you know when i see this stuff it it it
changes my perception of
how i think masculinity is viewed
whether accurate or not it is how i
see it yeah sure so so how do you think
masculinity is viewed
toxic i think it's very and
and
here's what i'll say i think you know
when you look at the uh
my mom are you dabbling in your world
but i think this is the five big big
personality traits
oh yeah yeah i just want to make sure
you know because that's what you studied
so i just want to make sure i do it
right
it's just as much as your world um
i think if you see an
over-representation on any of those axes
i think you're going to see negative um
behavior and i think
um you know one example i gave is like
when you
i take mothers for example i think their
need to protect
and to nurture sometimes if taken to an
extreme can turn into a turning
to a concept i think it's called
maternal gatekeeping
i think about a helicopter parent okay
so a maternal cancer was an idea but but
yeah
like the idea like you it's like the
idea that you insulate your your child
from
society's problems so much you protect
them that you stunt their
growth as a kid and i actually grew up
with a friend who went through that
uh and had to be diagnosed then i was
like whoa and
it just taught me the idea that yes of
course if you take
traditionally masculine traits and you
push them to an extreme i could
definitely see how they're negative for
society
um but i think even the more modest
forms
are sometimes seen as bad and like
competitive sports
is another interesting example where
like they
they don't like the idea of things being
too competitive for young boys and i'm
like
i feel like sometimes you rob them
something that they desperately need you
know whether it's video games
i'm not going to say women or anything
like that it just you know i remember
when when these ideas were removed
you know like oh we're no longer giving
out trophies or things like that
everyone gets a little participate
i was like ew like i loved it at school
when i even if i didn't come in first
just the idea of like trying to go for
it
meant something to me and i think ideas
that like men traditionally value so
much
uh i think men feel like are being
attacked that's what i think
i'm not saying theaters and like i can
point to a group of people or say it's
this gender or anything like that this
is just the perception i have of
that yeah so so what i'm because i i was
kind of thinking about the sabbath like
we're trying to figure out
to like how to support people right at
healthy gamer it's what we do
we try to offer people guidance i've
been toying around with like making a
guide to dating relationships which is
you know because i think there's a lot
of basics that
i'll teach because we're not taught
these things yeah
so i don't do couples counseling which i
explain to all the couples who wind up
in my office because i don't do that
but i definitely teach people how to
work on themselves to be
like better partners in relationships
and there are a lot of like
you know quips that i've come up with
one is that you know everyone's looking
for the right partner but in my
experience
the right partner is not something you
find it's something that you become
and and so i think that there's a lot of
like anyway so there's
kind of a random aside but what i'm kind
of hearing from you is that
so it is part of the struggle of trying
to figure out how to support people in
our community
men women transgender folks kind of
everyone
um part of what we're what i've been
trying to understand is like what is
toxic masculinity and what is
masculinity
and and because there's this sort of
idea that there's
what's your cringe um
i'm i'm i'm such a stickler for words
and and so i understand it conceptually
but every time i hear it i cringe
but i understand what it is no no no no
i think we should explore the cringe
that's where the money is
i think i think people don't understand
i think people
have this idea conceptually what the
word means but they don't understand how
it's internalized
by our brains inherently meaning you
know i remember taking a marketing class
and how important it was for a company
to get the right slogan and the right
words at the same spot
and no matter what a company may mean by
their slogan they understand that people
interpret words
and it just goes right to their core
irrespective of what spin
or what idea you want to put with it and
i think whether it's you know
toxic masculinity or men are trash i
think the ideas behind the sentiment i
can understand
i just think people don't understand the
implications it has subconsciously and
how it makes us feel viscerally when we
hear these ideas
how do you feel viscerally when you hear
the phrase toxic masculinity
i'm going to use men or trash because i
think that's like a much more
poignant one and i think a more extreme
one but um i think when i hear that for
example
i immediately think we're not redeemable
i think of the word trash and i think of
throwing it out
you know i think it's like it's over for
that and i and it's just such a tough
thing to
to hear especially when you're young in
development you see it online men are
trash men are trash and
masculinity's toxic or toxic masculinity
you're just like woof
it's very it's very polarizing language
that's why
so so you you you equate toxic
masculinity like in
when you hear the phrase toxic
masculinity your mind goes to men or
trash
okay men are trash is a separate phrase
but they're often coupled with each
other
online and platforms so for me yeah for
me it's like part of that whole ensemble
kind of of of polarizing terms that
people use
um that i think uh has a more of a
negative effect than anything else
yeah because it reinforces it reinforces
an idea that i think a lot of people
already hold in their heads
and what is that idea uh
you know it's like it goes back to that
idea of like policing and and
and and men have these
that men are the problem you know and
it's just like i said
i understand it conceptually as like as
a macro scale but as a micro skill
someone with dealing with struggles it
just constantly feels like i'm hearing
like your men's problems don't matter
that's what i hear when i hear that
stuff
even i know it's not what they're saying
i get it that's what it feels like just
considering the
other societal stuff that i deal with
have you felt like
people have treated you like your
problems don't matter
oh yeah oh yeah every all the time all
the time
still i mean sometimes i get sick of
talking about men's issues or men's
problems like i don't even want to
discuss them at times because it's just
like
you're always going to have a role
people like oh man are complaining again
i'm like
men are committing suicide too you know
like it's crazy to me
that there's all these things and you
could verifiably like quantify them in
some ways
and people are still like you guys don't
really have problems and i'm just like
what or or the worst one i don't think
it's worse but
it's it's somewhat but the the thing i
hate them even more sometimes is
it's like we get that you suffer but
because women suffer more like
let's put that on the back burner i'm
just like bruh um
so so yeah it's just it's just things
that peeved me but i i don't
want to get about it how does it how
does it feel when people
invalidate your struggles
i think i'm fortunate that i'm at the
age that i am now and that i've dealt
with so much
because i'm able to handle it up better
but sometimes it takes me back to how i
was when i was much younger
and i was dealing with stuff and i had
nothing
and it's just be like man 20 world me
would have never survived a lot of this
like this would have really
wrecked me um and it makes me
it makes me sad it makes me sad because
i think i recognize a lot of people are
young and in a vulnerable state
and the language we use doesn't help to
make them feel accepted or to feel okay
you know i think these conversations are
important they're absolutely necessary
to have
but i think we don't it's like what you
said there's a way to do things with
compassion
that's what's lacking with the discourse
and also understanding that the person
that you're talking to yes
you know they exist within a larger
group whether it be gender or sex or
whatever
but they're also individuals who are
dealing with their own problems that you
don't know about
and uh i just think the way we have
these conversations uh just makes me sad
more than anything
are there particular things kind of that
happened to you when you were
like 20 or maybe even younger where you
felt like you had a particular struggle
that was very important to you that
people didn't seem to
you know i can't i can't pinpoint a
moment i just know what it's like to go
through life without a mentor
and to go through life having to figure
it out as a young adult
and to have no resources to help you
like i know how lonely that is and how
frightening that is and how inadequate
and like shitty you feel it's not a
one-time thing it's like an everyday
thing for a lot of young folks and
it just seems like um when you're in
that little
what do they live with every day just
tremendous anxiety about like not
knowing where the future is going
and and and feeling like they're
supposed to have their [ __ ] together but
they don't
and feeling like
feeling like they're not good enough
while everyone else is like because you
just
you know you go to instagram and you
just like damn everyone's popping they
live in their best life right and it's
just like that's not what's happening
behind closed doors that's the
perception you have you feel alone and
struggling
that's what it is you just feel
inadequate talk to any like 18 to 21
year old and they'll say they'll be like
i don't know what the [ __ ] i'm doing
i'm in school and i don't like my major
i'm in debt
i don't know what i want to do with my
future women don't like me it's like god
damn it's a lot of struggles
you know i understand that women go
through on the same side i'm not
discounting that
for me it's just as a man i understand
that experience a little bit better so
that's just why i speak to well so i
think there's there is a big difference
and you know here i may say
something that will get me canceled but
what i'm hearing from you is that
the response so like i think i agree
with you that men and women all share
that i've had
you know my lion's share of men and
women who each struggle with 18 years
old and being directionless and being in
debt and whatnot
yeah but what i am hearing is that i i
do think there's a certain amount of
acceptableness to invalidate
men's struggles so what i'm hearing from
you is that
you know if you complain there are going
to be people out there who will say men
are trash what are you complaining about
and and and i think that we all struggle
and we all suffer this is what buddha
said he said that
you know there are two guaranteed things
in life and he didn't really break
things down by race or class or
ethnicity or gender
and the two things that all human beings
are entitled to in life are suffering
and death
and and i think that you know i tend to
agree with him
that suffering is sort of a universal
human condition
but what i'm kind of hearing from you is
that
because what seems like what really
grates you is the invalidation of your
struggle like the struggle is shared but
the way that people listen to your
struggle and that's sort of what i'm
hearing is that
you know even if we think about these
like sexual assault victims who are who
are men and who kind of
are like you know you should be happy
that your teacher is sleeping with you
that's your teacher 15.
sure you know you know even i hold some
of these bad ideas
what do you mean i hold some of these
bad like like conceptually i agree with
you that it's terrible that a teacher
would sleep with a fifth year old
in my mind for whatever conditioning i'm
just like hey man good job and it's a
terrible sentiment
terrible and i can acknowledge it's not
based on anything but it's just
i've been programmed i had a teacher i
liked i wish she would
it's not it's not a good thing to think
but i also participate that at times so
i have to check myself
um yeah but what you said about the
suffering is something i agree
i agree that it's it's part of our
experience i just think
i wish we wouldn't go to such lengths
create more suffering for others or if
people are suffering
to make them feel like they're suffering
doesn't matter you know like i think my
goal in life is to try to alleviate
people suffering as much as i can even
though people need to have a certain
level of it
and to not to not try and create more
for others
i think that's my goal so yeah i just
have a hard time when people
actively don't realize in which ways
they may be creating some and uh
don't seem to care at all that's like
the struggle i have sure
so just something for you to think about
abba you know i don't think we need to
get into this but i i would really
uh invite you to explore kind of on your
own if there have been
so the emotional energy when we talked
about the invalidation of people's
struggles and when i mentioned toxic
masculinity
when i see that emotional energy in
people oftentimes it stems from like
actually like a
bizarrely unrelated personal experience
and i think we're hearing the themes of
you kind of being alone
and and maybe they're because i i i
think you know oddly enough we didn't
really get into this but
you kind of said that you felt ashamed
of reaching out to other people for help
and the interesting thing is that shame
is learned
right so like like like we human beings
aren't
born with that in fact babies reach out
for help all the time
so that shame of being inadequate and
needing help from someone else
is something that we're taught and
conditioned to do
and so oddly enough you know if we think
about why did you feel ashamed asking
for help it's probably because if we
kind of track that back
it's probably because there were times
in your life where you did reach out for
help
and then your struggle was essentially
invalidated
and someone made you feel like right
like that's that's how you're going to
develop that
shameful condition okay can i ask you
something in your practice when you're
speaking to men do you not feel like
they have that same experience
of reaching out for help because
okay so that's why i'm telling you okay
okay all right
all right that's why i'm telling you
that i've walked this journey with many
men
and the fact that you respond very
emotionally to like when i mention toxic
masculinity you just get pissed right
like
it's like some slumbering giant wakes up
within you and like
you equate that to men and trash that
goes to an
invalidation of the struggle and pain
that you feel which in turn probably
relates i'm
i'm making a real stretch here okay so
each step at these is like 10
chance of being right but because it is
a shared experience which is why i can
lay this out for you
or other people that are watching right
so like if that pisses you off then
chances are like you're
you have personally felt like that's
personal emotional energy
about you've been on the receiving end
of that stick which is why it hurts so
much
when you see other people doing it you
know like
like victimizing like 20 year olds you
imagine 20
year old you who's seeing on twitter
that men are trash and like he doesn't
have
the fortitude that you have to like not
internalize that
yeah yeah and oddly enough that's
something that you understand because at
one point
you didn't have the internal fortitude
to internalize it
which is exactly what you did
and and that's sort of why we get to 18
year olds because
it's interesting because it's not like a
catastrophic emotional moment that we're
gonna have an emotional catharsis about
it's gonna be like these little bits of
like conditioning that happen
about you know when you were seven years
old there was one day that you like
didn't know how to do your math homework
and then like you know you tried to talk
to someone about it and they were like
shouldn't you know how to do this
okay i actually got something for you
okay this is the one that stuck
it's one of the few childhood numbers so
i remember oh man this is taking me so
far back this is the first time i was
12. i was 12 i think could be wrong
about the age it doesn't matter
uh we would do this thing at school
where once it would snow real bad we
would make these snow forts
and everyone would make their own and
then obviously a little bit of like
water would fall and it would get iced
up and um there was this girl who lived
across the street from me and my
neighborhood we take the bus the whole
group of us take a bus but she'd be part
of that group
and uh man i remember having a crush on
this girl
i'll never forget i used to have a big
question on this girl but i never talked
about it
and um you know when you're a kid and
you have a crush on somebody sometimes
you might be like a little bit mean to
them and so i had a little habit of like
going back and forth with her like that
as a kid i remember this
and one morning
we came to school and her fort had been
destroyed as well as like two other
three-fourths
she went to the principal and she said
abba did it
abba destroyed my fort and so i got
called into the principal's office and
i'm just standing here she's there so i
was like oh
what's she doing here and the prisoner
asked me why i destroyed the forts and i
was like what are you talking about
and and he's like he's like well people
want to know i
was like i didn't do anything do you
think i came to school early to destroy
things you think i walked here
and they're like well everyone's saying
it's you and i was like i didn't do it
okay i don't know what to tell you i
didn't do it
and um i remember they called my parents
and it turned into something
and i'll never forget this i think it
was like two days later
i got called back into the office and
the girl was there she was crying the
principal's
standing there and her dad's there and
i'm just like what'd i do this time
and uh he says she has something she
would like to say
and she said uh i'm sorry and i'll say
what happened and it's like
turns out the janitor was getting tired
of these snow forts when he was cleaning
the yard
so he just ran over them just to flatten
them out and clear them out of the way
and i remember being so mad i just
remember being so angry because i'm like
everybody looked at me like i was
garbage for a couple days just like
she's that being accused and like how
her word was inherently taken as true
and i just remember being so mad that
day and uh
i accepted her apology and went back but
i don't know why that memory always
stuck with me as the first time
i was accused of something i didn't do
and i just
i remember being so mad about that now
that's probably the experience
yeah so that's it
yeah that's a good one i have never
brought that up before
yeah so it's interesting right like how
the mind works how like your mind just
like jumps to that experience because
what i'm hearing so so i'm gonna try to
interpret this a little bit for you okay
because like it feels a little bit
off to me but i think it's actually it
it's that emotional energy like
now i'll ask you abby you know just
something for you to think about when
you hear the word toxic masculinity
does the quality color and flavor of the
emotion you feel
feel similar to what you felt in that
second principal's office
oh yeah for sure you know because the
idea is the idea that like
you're wrong without any concept of who
i am like you're wrong it's that
similar idea i would be inclined to
agree with you right so which is why
your mind jumped there because it's
it's but like there's there's a lot of
subtlety there right because like what
i'm hearing is that like
when she had a grievance what happened
when she was hurt
and then what happened she was she was
hurt she was hurt right you were called
in
there was a trial people were called in
everyone said you do it there was an
investigation
and when you were hurt what happened
people thought you were trash for days
what happened when you were hurt
yeah i think i was just i was given a
small apology and then i shut out the
door
absolutely yeah right
yeah no no and let me ask you another
question
were you pressured or forced into
accepting her apology
i think yeah i think i was just expected
to accept it
right so like when you're a 12 year old
boy and there's a girl crying and she
apologizes
you don't get to say [ __ ] you
no right
even though that's how you feel so in
that moment it's sort of like it's it's
incredibly invalidating
right and and it's it's like it's just
it's like
night and day yeah and and i think it it
speaks to a lot of like
resentment that you carry with you which
is justified
but i think still is going to color the
way that you look at things
for sure undoubtedly undoubtedly i mean
you know and and similar experience like
that i've played out throughout my life
where culpability is just automatically
assumed
for reasons i can't explain so i
attribute to gender
but it's just like um it's a tough thing
to accept when you think of yourself as
like somebody who has some measure of
integrity
and that's immediately thrown out the
window because for whatever reason
it's a hard thing to stomach it's like i
didn't do anything wrong this moment but
i'm immediately seen as evil
it's a hard thing to accept and to
yeah this is hard it's a very difficult
thing for me to accept
yeah i mean what i'm hearing is that
you're being blamed for men being trash
yeah yeah definitely definitely and
it's compounded by the idea that
sometimes
it's like you know because i don't i
don't necessarily experience it
when men are trash i'm not there in
those intimate moments with women where
they're being violent so i don't
i don't know what that feels like i can
hear about it and i can sympathize
but i do know what it feels like to
to be falsely accused by somebody who
did something terrible to you
and and because they're a woman they're
like inherently seen as like they
couldn't have done it
and it's a tough thing to stomach so i
think that's why i probably feel more
strongly about that
because that's what i have visceral
experiences with absolutely
you know like my my negative experiences
with men could have probably been
ranging
from when i was like 14 to 17.
and there was always a catharsis we got
into a fight we exhausted all our energy
one person one one person lost and i
move away but there was never this idea
that
you're evil because you did this it was
like we're gonna just duke it out as
equals and then that's it you know and i
could live with that
what i couldn't understand was like no
this person was wrong
but i'm seen as a guilty party that's a
hard thing to stomach and not only
talking about like when i was like 17
i'm like talking about even later on in
life so
um that's a tough part i think for me
has there been another
time where you know you've been right
yeah yeah yeah
yeah it was crazy it was crazy this girl
tried to pressure me to kiss her i'm
like
i don't want to like i told her multiple
times i'm not interested
and you know because i felt like it was
too soon for me that i just didn't want
to in that moment
and but i was interested in this person
but i just felt like the way she was
going about it i wasn't feeling
and i remember a week later right we
were having this conversation and she
was like
this is like a 2018 so prime time you
know harvey weinstein's out there
and she was having this conversation
about like men have to be more conscious
about the fact that they're pressuring
women and i was like
you did that to me like a week ago
you know i couldn't believe it in that
moment you know
and it was just such a weird thing to me
it was like
it it that even to this day triggers me
yeah i see that the audacity for you to
have this speech for me right now when
you're not even taking culpability for
the things that you've done and it's
just
that's the frustrating part but like i
said
i feel this viscerally because of the
fact that there are my experiences
with women right and i feel this
viscerally because i only date women so
the things that men are doing that maybe
merit the whole
amount of trash i don't see them because
a lot of this stuff happened happens
behind closed doors or things like that
and
you know there are too many parties
present so i'm not discounting the idea
that these things happen
or that women are suffering i would
never do that but i'm like i can only
speak to what i see
and that's what's going to cover my
perspective so yeah so i just want to
share
you know a couple of like maybe academic
thoughts sure for sure go for it
um so you know the first is that that i
want to just
invite you to question your earlier
assertion
like the assertion you just made that i
don't see that so i think this is
something where you know
a lot of men i know certainly since i've
started looking for it that like
if you actually look at it objectively
there may be more of it than you realize
um and i think it's true of of women too
where where you know like
sometimes it's kind of interesting
because when i work with my female
clients sometimes i'll ask a question
like we'll be talking about something in
therapy and i'll ask them like
what would your girlfriend say about
this and like you know
their response is always like their
girlfriends are overwhelmingly
supportive
irrespective of like how this person may
have screwed up
and you know in some cases you'll have
like married women that have affairs and
stuff and their girlfriends are like 100
supporting them right and and so you
know i'm i'm a big fan of being
authentic and then i'm you know so i'll
ask for permission to be like a little
bit more judgmental i don't even ask
them
like can i be judgmental in this moment
and so if you really
so i think like we have a tendency when
we're with our group
to you know gloss over a lot of things
and say we haven't seen them because you
haven't been on the receiving end
but behind some of these closed-door
conversations that may get people
canceled
there may be more evidence of toxicity
you know directed from men towards women
that we sort of like pass off based on
our language
so i'd encourage you to just really be a
little bit like careful and objective
about that
i'm not saying that you know you're
sometimes there's more toxicity that we
take for granted because it's so
normative
right and like certainly we've been
talking about the normative toxicity
that men
put on themselves and there may be other
kinds of toxicities there's just
something to think about
no no no you're right and and biases
like that
probably have clouded my conversations
with people in my
uh my time on earth and
i would be inclined to agree i think
it's just hard to recognize where those
blinders
are because a lot of this happens in
gray areas
you know even when i recount the story
of the girl to other people
sometimes they don't even see it even
after explaining them to so it can be
difficult
to see that and and i would i would be
inclined to agree with you that i could
do a better job in that regards
yeah so but that's the nature of
blinders right like we don't blame you
for having blinders because that's just
what the mind does it has all these
kinds of blinders and that's the nature
of bias
and and so that's number one so the
second thing that i just want to
touch on which is you know i'd love to
get your thoughts so you know i tossed
out this term
toxic masculinity we went on a beautiful
tangent my favorite of the day
uh it was it really abbott's lovely to
see how
like animated and passionate and like
when you get that plus the
thoughtfulness like i
i don't know why i mean the stories
really weren't positive in any way shape
or form but just
hearing the way is something about your
storytelling capability or something i
just really enjoyed hearing that and i i
felt like
i felt oddly enough happy that you were
able to sort of share that even though
it's kind of an ugly story if you really
think about it
yeah yeah you know
but you know it's interesting even even
your response to the story
indicates the different perception
of it because i i feel like
again this is probably my biases again
but it's one of those things where it's
like
we can have this conversation and it not
be too much of an issue i think
precise maybe i'm wrong precisely
because of the different genders
do you know what i mean wha what do you
mean
meaning like i'm talking about as i'm
talking about this right and we're
having this conversation about being
pressured like
even though intellectually we might look
at it and be like yeah that was terrible
and toxic i think
subconsciously we don't we don't infer
that same implication
we don't actually see it as necessarily
being as terrible
as the action itself would normally
dictate does that make sense
i i say it's terrible right i think i
think you see it as terrible too
i don't even think i do that's that's
the [ __ ] up part yeah that's the part
about that
so so so here's here's the reason i
think you think it is terrible
on a subconscious or unconscious level
there are parts of you that don't
but like the fact that i mentioned to
you that there's going to be
you know maybe you can look for a time
in your life where your struggles were
horribly invalidated
right and and your mind goes there that
tells us that like you do
feel on some level like your mind can
like i'm talking about a position where
your struggles are invalidated
and you're unfairly judged and your mind
is like here we've got it we found the
file
right yeah it jumps right there so that
that i think even though i don't doubt
that society has taught you because
that's what happened right in that
moment
is society taught you that like she's
been this
entire school has thought you're an
[ __ ] for two days and
it's not like the apology should be
public in front of the
school assembly because they've been you
know
and like did anyone know that she
apologized did anyone know that
you were falsely accused no so the
shaming was public but the apology was
private and then you were expected to
move on
that is society's response to you being
wronged
right and so no no surprise that you
were
taught or conditioned to feel like
you don't get to complain like who are
you to complain
does that make sense so i get that your
condition but i i
also think that your mind's ability to
connect those two dots means that
there's also
some amount of like authentic like you
recognize that that
really was not fair and was uh i
i agree i think my question lies more in
the fact do other people have that
connection and if they don't
how do they perceive it because i think
it's fine for you to feel like something
unjustly happened to you
but if other people around you don't
acknowledge it it can feel very
you start to question it i start to
guess like myself to be like
did anything really happen uh and so i
think that's more so my issue
uh more than anything sure sure so so i
think that too
i'm guessing that there's going to be
other stories about that
yeah right there are going to be stories
where as you grow older and you become
more
like assured of yourself yeah i bet you
if we dug around we would find stories
where like you
felt a particular way i mean we've even
heard a couple right we're like
they're these people publicly talking
about bound setting and respecting
you know people and then like here they
are like groping you and
you know trying to get a piece of abba
yeah because that's that's a fine piece
of meat
and and then they're like you know
they're they're talking one way
and you know what i question i
question whether or not that kind of
stuff
has any kind of subconscious negative
um
consequences in the sense that like it's
one thing to say things but i think
people really resonate with how you
act and in terms of the messaging i
wonder if that's not
backwards it's like we can say things
intrinsically like oh we can say like oh
you know
we shouldn't do this to each other or
like oh you know i know plenty of people
like gender roles are terrible and then
like you see their dating life and they
subscribe to them 150
all their choices and how they want to
live and i'm like are we doing something
that's super confusing
in the sense that you know we can say
whatever we want but the way that we act
really encourages people to not act in
line with what we
aspire to be but more so how we're being
does that make sense yeah i didn't quite
follow you but i think i know what
you're saying so here's what i would say
to that
it is very common for someone to
publicly support a righteous cause
and their ego to excuse them being an
[ __ ] in their personal life
because they support a good cause
i don't know if that's speaking to what
you're saying but i think that we see
this
i see this like a seeming contradiction
very often
and there's even a term for it in
psychology which is reaction formation
so it's a defense mechanism okay um
where like the the classic example of of
reaction formation is the person who's
actually gay who becomes a homophobe
no okay yes right so like they feel so
ashamed of like what they are on the
inside that they like they're taught to
hate it and then they like resent
themselves
they're very kind of like ugly on the
inside they have a lot of resentment a
lot of pain a lot of suffering
and then they channel that towards the
outside world and like hate gay people
right and and so yeah i i think it's not
necessarily what i'm going i think where
i'm trying to go is like
you can have a parent that tells you to
not be physically violent with others
but if they beat you
do you go on to say that's an acceptable
response
or do you like do you base your reality
off of what they did rather than what
they said does that make sense
absolutely no yeah you base your reality
off of the [ __ ] confusion of being in
that situation
okay okay cool right and and so i i'll
give you just another example most of
the advice that we give to other human
beings is based on the resentment for
what we
of the mistake mistakes that we've made
in the past
sure i would agree with that right so
like there's there's definitely like
some kind of
connection and tension between what you
say and what you do
and there's a reason why human beings
are like hypocritical like there's all
kinds of psychological reasons why we're
hypocritical
reaction formation is one one is like it
har
you know it comes from our own
resentment even the political not
political but like the views that we're
talking about today i think
if we really look at the map are deeply
rooted in your personal experiences
which is
reasonable right that's just how we
learn to care about particular things
that's right that's true um kind of the
last sort of academic point that i
wanted to mention was kind of back to
toxic masculinity
and it was sort of like we're trying to
figure out what to do about this because
the term means so many different things
to so many different people
right so some people equate toxic
masculinity as masculinity is toxic
sure right so that's sort of the men is
trash masculinity
is inherently evil patriarchal whatever
you know paternal whatever then there's
kind of another perspective on it which
is that there's like healthy masculinity
and there's
toxic masculinity that there are some
gender roles which are actually like
okay to have and and can even be healthy
like
competitiveness taking accountability
which don't necessarily have to be
gendered but
sort of are gendered
and that somewhere along the way like
you know
learning to be self-sufficient crosses a
certain like gray area
into the bridge of like self-isolation
you know
and and sort of like being in control of
your emotions starts to mean like i
think a good example is
sort of this apology that you were kind
of forced into because you can't really
like you can't really say no i don't
accept your apology right you're not
allowed to do that
yeah and and so there are certain
aspects of masculinity which can
become toxic but that masculinity in and
of itself is not inherently bad
which isn't a separate argument but and
so i'm not quite
sure because i i do think there's a lot
of confusion around these terms and like
what it means
um you know you're smiling again so
penny for your thoughts
uh no no i'm actually just listening
intently uh while i'm okay
yeah so so i think this is something
that we're kind of working through
um it's something that we do research on
and i'm just kind of curious so i i
you know i understood your reaction but
i just wanted to share sort of how we're
thinking about it which is like trying
to figure out
you know is certain amount okay and then
like what is the difference between
healthy masculinity and toxic
masculinity
yeah yeah i think i think even getting
to that point
having that discussion is difficult for
people because the terms are so loaded
and because like again you know so many
varying definitions and
oftentimes we're having these
discussions on public platforms and 140
characters it's tough to
get a good perception of the term and i
think branding wise
because i i think people hate marketing
terms in terms of civil discourse but i
think it matters
i think how things are branded
inherently creates biases and
and natural reactions to things that
cloud
the possibility of like good discourse
um
and i think most men's reaction when
they hear that term is viscerally
negative
and so you can't even get past the layer
of like explaining what's going on
behind it
because they're so reactionary to the
term you've just used
you know um so i think
i think that's one hurdle that's like
very difficult to cross for most people
i think i can intellectually do it and
and be able to hear that i get what
you're saying you know what
i agree with you but i also know for
most folks that they're not going to get
to that point and that's a tough thing
to
to hear yeah
that's my thoughts on on that that first
hurdle seems to be the one that most
people have difficult with difficulty
with
and there's also a question to be asked
like are we using the right words
and some people like what does it matter
there's a problem i'm like it does
matter though
every the the words you use have
visceral reactions for everyone
you know whether you use words like
moist and people are just instantly
grossed out even though you're talking
about a
countertop that is moist just say i did
that people like they hear the word
our words matter what words we use
matter and i think
that's such a seems like such a minor
detail but i think it's like one of the
largest impediments to a real discussion
on what i think i agree with you which
is the
idea is like sometimes you know
masculine
traditionally masculine traits can be
taken too far they do become bad
aggression is a perfect example i think
men you might correct me if i'm wrong
men are overrepresented on one end of
the scale in terms of aggression correct
i i don't know what you mean by that
question when we talk about um
the big five right uh i'm pretty sure
when it comes to like aggressive type
behaviors are men not overrepresented
what do you mean by over-represented do
you mean greater than 50 percent of
aggressive
figures are done by men yeah i actually
don't know that statistic off the top of
my head okay
i could be wrong i think i know with
like conscientiousness or like you know
ideas like compassion i think women
might be more represented in some
regards like men when it comes to
violence like
they're much more represented on the
extremes if i remember correctly that's
what i remember
so at times like violent crime
traditions why so why men are present
there whatever
um where was i going with this okay yes
i could agree that if you if you over
represent men in certain areas
uh certain personality traits that yes i
could definitely understand that the
okay toxic masculine i can see how
that's represented
um and i think the discussion is valid
again i i just think it really comes
down to the the
the um the branding more than anything
that'd be my
yeah so i think when it gets to
statistics we get into a really tricky
situation so like just to give you an
example
there was a paper that showed that being
on
antidepressants during pregnancy doubled
your risk of having an autistic child
so people like when this paper came out
people freaked out because like doubling
your risk and the other thing that you
have to remember is that like
media organizations are not about
accurate representation
of knowledge they're about clicks
right so like they're gonna make things
as inflammatory as possible certainly
one interpretation of the paper
the thing that people don't really get
though is that
if you look at statistically doubling
the risk sounds really really bad
right but i still think like 98
of autistic children are born to women
without antidepressants
and 98 to 99 of women on antidepressants
do not have
an autistic child so it's kind of
interesting because depending on how you
look at the numbers like the vast
majority of autistic children are still
born to people
it doubles your risk but the risk is
very very small
and so just from an epidemiological
perspective it's still like
you know 99 out of 100 autistic kids are
born to mothers
without antidepressants and if you have
a 99 if you have it if you're taking
antidepressants
during pregnancy you have like a less
than one percent risk of having an
autistic child and so i think when
when people ask these questions about
you know males are over represented on
on
the aggression scale i don't know the
data but i know that you have to be
really careful about interpreting that
kind of data
because my general perception about men
in aggressiveness
is that people
overestimate the percentage of men who
are aggressive
yes yes that's been my anecdotal
experience
is that like yeah i i i want to
understand
i think that's why i was more so talking
about the extremes where it's like a
very small minute
population size but i get what you're
saying yes yeah so you just have to be
i just don't know what that means and so
i'm hesitant to say yes to that because
like
i think you know the vast vast majority
of men are not
violent in any way yeah what i meant to
say and maybe
i'll just try to clear it up is that
idea like when you see extremely high
levels of
aggressive or violent behavior um
traditionally men are overrepresented in
that very small
population that that i could would
completely believe so that's what i was
trying to say i just didn't use my words
well so what you're saying is that
that if you take the most the one
percent of the most violent human beings
on the planet
most of them or more than 50 percent
will be men
yeah yeah which i i i would completely
believe that statistic
yeah it's just and i think yeah i think
we both agree on that and then
you know one thing that was really
interesting for me to read up on is the
idea that like
we're more alike than we are different
in terms of like how
um those personality traits are
represented the idea like uh
yes sir go ahead yeah so i mean i was
gonna say just as a clinician like
that's been my experience is that i
certainly think that there are unique
gender issues but at the end of the day
i'm sort of in buddhist camp which is
that if you're born
you're sol yeah yeah and
you know i'm not mad at that i'm not mad
at that and so it's kind of like
you know everyone sort of deserves
support and help
um yeah yep yeah so how are you feeling
about today's
conversation i mean did we cover most of
what you were kind of looking for
or yeah no i think it was a great
discussion and uh when
depth on certain things that i haven't
had an opportunity to discuss before so
that was great
yeah yeah i i mean i i sort of feel like
we're at a natural stopping point or
pausing point maybe is a better way to
to talk about it makes me think back to
you know these emails that i wrote to my
friends and a couple years ago and i
remember i
i showed them to one of my uh
one of my colleagues and i was like you
know i was thinking about talking about
some of this stuff publicly and
and i was like you know but i i'm not
ready to yet because i'm pretty sure i'm
going to lose my job
you know at harvard and academic
position and he was like oh no no
if you talk about this you're not going
to just lose your academic position
you're going to lose
all of your positions
and so i was like oh okay interesting so
yeah
gotta make strategic moves um i know i
know we're probably nearing the end so i
don't want to keep you too long but
there's one last thing i want to touch
on i think yeah please
and this is not related to this topic um
but i wanted to know
i think oftentimes we talk about
depression and uh issues like that
affecting us in the first person but i
wanted to know what you think about
having people around you that are
depressed like i have a someone who is
almost like a little brother uh going
through i don't know i say it's
depression but
clearly he according to him huge bounce
of anxiety he has a hard time
functioning in
i as his friend um as somebody who loves
him i
have a hard time knowing how to help him
in those situations or what i can't do
beyond listening
because he feels i feel like he's so
deep in it you know and
just to give you an idea like i'm
convinced i i i believe it's
wholeheartedly like i'll get a call any
day and just hear that he's gone you
know
and as a friend it's kind of hard to
deal with that kind of powerlessness
because i see him suffering and i just
don't know
how to manage that
is that too much to ask at the end no i
mean in a sense yes but
it needs to be asked and it sounds
certainly important so
ask it um
can i just think for a second
by all means
what's it what's it like being in the
position you're in
what's it like sort of trying to support
him and
him being kind of in a dark place
to tile
futile because i know he has to take
those steps
but as someone who's watching the
suffering happening in front of them
it's like uh
difficult what are the stuff he has to
take
i i'm not sure i know i know how i
function so i know how i can move
forward
i can't i don't want to impose my
experience or my way of viewing things
on him considering he might have a
different experience or
might have different needs you know so
just so so i don't know what those steps
are but i know that
there may be things that he has to
accept or do things that i don't know
you feel powerless yeah i mean i think
as a friend you always want to be able
to lend a helping hand
and and so you want to lend a helping
hand what are you doing
aside from listening and checking in i
don't know what else to do you know i
say hey man if you need to talk what's
your
what's the value of listening and
checking it checking in
i think there's huge value in it i think
it definitely helps people feel like
they matter in some sense i hope
i think i think i'm worried it'll feel
futile or not enough
if that person is gone
do you do what i'm saying yep i yeah
so here's here's here's what i'm hearing
that you're doing okay
you're helping him understand that he
matters
your words right
what do you think about that
it it feels like the most i can do
because i i've pondered it and i don't
feel
i don't think i can do anything else
yeah so i i think that
um i'm going to give you just a little
bit of maybe additional stuff you can do
but i think the first thing to
understand for people in your situation
is that you are doing more way more than
you realize
like way way more and
and the reason is because like so we
tend to view
our value like you know what you're
doing it just doesn't appear to be
helping
right because it seems like he's not
getting better
so the first thing to understand is that
sometimes like if you look at
psychiatric treatment like people will
be in psychiatric treatment for a year
or two and they're not getting better
and so one way to interpret that is that
you know we're not helping him because
treatment doesn't seem to be working
but the other thing that sometimes you
discover is that your treatment is the
only thing that's keeping them afloat
right so they're taking on a bunch of
water and you're baling it with a bucket
on a daily like weekly basis with
treatment so this is something that i
see very very commonly when friends ask
me what more can i do the first thing is
that they almost universally
grossly underestimate the impact that
they're having
so you're saying i can't i feel like i'm
not doing anything whereas my estimation
is you're doing actually like eighty
percent of it
because i want you to imagine what it's
like to be in that person's shoes
and be in such a dark spot and to have
one
beacon of pers someone who no matter
what their mind tells them
there's one person in their life that is
listening to them and is
is signaling to them you matter
like that's all a human being needs and
when when people
really like kill themselves and stuff
like that what they lose is they lose
that last beacon
it becomes completely dark
right so so i i want to really emphasize
that like one beacon
and i i've been you know once again
anecdotal experience
but i've you know i've heard from people
who because you know i talk to people
who are deeply suicidal for long periods
of time
about like what keeps them going and i
cannot
tell you how many times i've heard just
the most
random things that seem so insignificant
like their cat
right like what would happen to their
cat if they died
and that a lot of times like people will
say like this is the one person
you should go back i forget if it's the
porn addiction stream or the burnt out
gifted kids stream
we had a stream where some guy was
talking about like he was so close to
suicide
except there was one random person on
the internet that they would like talk
to every single day
and like i remember we were joking at
the end of the stream about how like
that person is the hero
and the thing is like that person is
never gonna know
yeah right because you're just not gonna
get that feedback
um and and this is where
you know i hate to break it to you but
i'm very good at my job and i can't
keep someone alive right right so that
outcome
there's another subtle thing that your
mind is doing which is that
if i do more i can prevent a particular
outcome
no you can't can you do more sure can
you do less
sure but you can't your
fear that you're gonna wake up one day
and discover that he's gone is not
something that you can actually control
you can be really good and believe me
i'm really good and i've learned that
lesson the hard way
right right that as human being i
fundamentally cannot control the actions
of another human being no matter how
many years i spent studying in india and
what institutions i've trained at
i cannot keep someone from ending their
life
i mean i can in sort of acute in
specific situations
and i do have a good impact on it but at
the end of the day there's a certain
amount that you just can't do i think i
understand that intellectually
these are things i know i think it's
just coping with that reality that's
difficult
yeah so that's where so i i get that you
are so then i think that
this is where the conversation really
becomes a longer conversation because
in the same way that some of these like
views around men's issues are tied to
your personal experiences
there may be something here about you
know when you were so alone
and when you were so you know isolated
and in a dark place that there may be
something there that
you know may i i don't know i mean i
think there if it's
if you want to understand it
intellectually but you feel a particular
way like there's an exploration process
around those feelings that can lead us
to some kind of
understanding which will then like
decompress the feelings
is it not possible that it's just a fear
of the inevitable
inevitability in the sense that like
this is someone i just care deeply about
and i see them suffering and it and i
what you said is 100 correct maybe
my impact is way higher than i'm
estimating i could actually probably
concede that to you but i think it
doesn't
even though i know that and i know i
can't have a white
why do you think it's inevitable
just just the way i hear him speak and
just the way i hear him speak
there's a certain like era of
hopelessness that that he has when he
speaks
and sometimes it fades but then it comes
back so strongly
so and then he and then and then there's
like a disappearance yeah go ahead
so you said the words we use matter
right sure
yeah so they matter the
the way we interpret words is based on
our own experience
right so if you're hearing his words
why does your mind interpret that as
hopelessness
see if you want to get to the bottom of
this that's where you have to go
right because i i feel like i'm watching
somebody in the loop
and the loop seems never ending like
where they were at day one
and day 95 seems exactly identical or
progressively getting worse
does that seem possible how long has
this person been on this
in this loop a few years a few years and
so
a few years but i've watched it
progressively get worse and more intense
and
and this person has like reiterated the
idea that it's getting more intense and
is this person getting professional help
i think they tried and
didn't like the experience so they quit
so you know i've offered to
to pay for it and whatever you know but
it's one of those things where
unless they take the olive branch i
can't force it on them so um
sure but there are ways you can get them
to take the olive branch so here are a
couple things you can do
okay very practically all right so i
know like
i think this is definitely a longer
discussion but um let me try to at least
give you a couple things because this is
a question we get a lot how can i help
someone
so the first is i think you can share
with them
how you feel so you can tell them that
you know you
i hear that you're getting worse i hear
you've been struggling with this
a long time i'm trying to be here for
you i want to support you
i'm always here to listen and also i'm
terrified
that one day i'm gonna wake up and
you're not gonna be here anymore
could i ask just one thing right there
does that not place
more pressure on them yes
yeah and is that a good or a bad thing
it's a good thing okay so here's why
so in relationships we have caregivers
and caretakers
right what are you in the relationship
the caregiver
the caretaker uh the caregiver i would
assume
and then they are the caretake caretaker
so who's responsible for making things
right
uh
hmm are they okay actually i i guess it
would be me yep yeah
that needs to change right yeah because
even the framing of how you said it kind
of threw me off a little bit but okay
yep
right so like like this is where because
he does
so it's authentic can it be dangerous
absolutely can it pressure him more
absolutely
could it tip him over the edge
and this is a relationship you aren't
his doctor
right you're his friend right and so one
of the best things you can do for
another human being is let them take
care of you
right like he has to understand that
like like this is the problem is it's
all one way right now
and he's got to understand that like he
he carries some of this weight in this
relationship
you can't carry it all on your own and
it's healthy
for you to tell him like i don't want to
wake up and not have you there
that day and so it's like his
responsibility to like
alleviate that fear in you and is that
going to put pressure on him
absolutely and so then you talk about
that
and you even say i was afraid that if i
shared this with you
it would be like too much for you to
handle but i've been sitting with this
for a long time
and like i'm i'm afraid
and because you're my friend like i hope
i can share this with you is it okay
that i shared it with you
right so i think this is a real problem
with like mental illness i see this a
lot as a psychiatrist is like
speaking of accountability too many
psychiatrists take accountability away
from their patients
and it's not healthy it's how you create
a dependent patient
and part of what i have to do is like
give that power back to them
right like you have to give him you're
saying that the issue is he's powerless
like give him some of that power
but here's the problem if you give him
that power he could do something with it
he could do the wrong thing
but you're basically like you're
surrendering
that piece of the relationship to him
and could it be too much
for him to handle absolutely but is it
healthy in the long run i think so
you know if you're really dealing with
issues of suicidality and stuff i think
what he really needs is professional
help
but from uh from a more you know macro
level like taking that kind of off the
table
i want you and everyone else to
understand that a lot of times the most
important thing that you can do for
someone is have faith in them to do it
themselves
and sometimes that means like not
protecting them from it
right because you're like so protective
you're like we talked about oh
parental gatekeeping in here you are
yeah because you're treating him like
he's frail but like it sounds to me like
he's actually incredibly strong that
he's been
sinking further and further below water
for years and he's still around
sounds incredibly resilient yeah
but you know i agree i think he's
resilient i think he's dealt with so
much and
you know me knowing his lifestyle i
agree um
i just worry that he gets to a point
where enough becomes enough and he's
tired of struggling you know
and i can't tell somebody to keep
suffering but um
so i think that that too is a reasonable
thing for you to share with him that you
sh you have that fear that enough is
enough
and then the more practical thing is i
would really talk to him about
you know asking about his experience of
mental health treatment and and try to
really direct him that way because this
is
really you know i i don't know exactly
what the situation is but it sounds like
you're afraid and that he really needs
help and so there's like
you know one bad experience doesn't you
know
yeah it's like they're good burgers and
they're bad burgers you shouldn't write
off all burgers based on just having one
bad burger
i agree i agree so that's really what i
would encourage him to do is to try to
you know try to understand what his
negative experience was and try to push
him in the right direction
okay well that was uh wonderful advice
and it's something i'll probably get to
right
probably today so thank you for that
yeah well thanks a lot for the
conversation
and you know i hope things work out well
yeah and good luck to you and your
friend
yeah again so thank you for doing this i
honestly mean a lot of people in my
community reached out when they heard i
was going to talk about
the last subject so um you just taken
the time to talk about that was good for
me and
for other folks so i appreciate it oh i
loved it man i i really enjoy talking to
you and i think it's you know
you move really fast in terms of like
having a view and being able to sit with
new thoughts and different thoughts
and so it's it's cool it's refreshing
all right so thanks a lot you ever want
to
hit me up hit me up all right we'll do
man take care
cheers and who are we raiding chat
we are going to auto mod wants to ban
the phrase ligma but i'm going to
allowed
allow it